Opaque PyObject ABI support (#5807)
PyO3/pyo3: guide/src/building-and-distribution.md

```console
$ PYO3_PRINT_CONFIG=1 cargo build
   Compiling pyo3-ffi v0.28.3 (/Users/goldbaum/Documents/pyo3/pyo3-ffi)
error: failed to run custom build command for `pyo3-ffi v0.28.3 (/Users/goldbaum/Documents/pyo3/pyo3-ffi)`

Caused by:

>   process didn't exit successfully: `/Users/goldbaum/Documents/pyo3/target/debug/build/pyo3-ffi-120b26b17564bf98/build-script-build` (exit status: 101)

Reviewer: Thanks for updating this 👍 

I wonder if (once we move to `ui-test` in #5863) we can somehow make a ui test with this file to keep it in sync.

Reviewer: Answer is no, because the pyo3-ffi crate is still only compiled once by `ui-test`.

  --- stdout
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(Py_GIL_DISABLED)
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(PyPy)
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(GraalPy)
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(RustPython)
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(py_sys_config, values("Py_DEBUG", "Py_REF_DEBUG", "Py_TRACE_REFS", "COUNT_ALLOCS"))
  cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(pyo3_disable_reference_pool)

>   cargo:rustc-check-cfg=cfg(pyo3_leak_on_drop_without_reference_pool)

Reviewer: Interesting, this is a bit messy! I opened #6067 to move these.

>
> Projects are encouraged to migrate off the feature, as it caused [major development pain](faq.md#i-cant-run-cargo-test-or-i-cant-build-in-a-cargo-workspace-im-having-linker-issues-like-symbol-not-found-or-undefined-reference-to-_pyexc_systemerror) due to the lack of linking.

### `Py_LIMITED_API`/`abi3`/`abi3t`

By default, Python extension modules can only be used with the same Python version they were compiled against.
For example, an extension module built for Python 3.5 can't be imported in Python 3.8.
[PEP 384](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0384/) introduced the idea of the limited Python API, which would have a stable ABI enabling extension modules built with it to be used against multiple Python versions.
The ABI defined by PEP 384 is called `abi3`, since it's stable for all Python 3.X releases.
In 2026, the steering council approved [PEP 803](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0803/)) which defines a new stable ABI, `abi3t`, that can be used on the free-threaded build of CPython.
Extensions built using the `abit3` ABI are importable on both the GIL-enabled and free-threaded builds of any CPython version newer than the target version.

> So, `abi3t` extensions built for the Python 3.15 limited API will be importable on Python 3.16, 3.17, and all future Python 3.X versions.

Reviewer: Is it worth being explicit that 3.15 builds are importable on 3.15 itself?

```suggestion
So, `abi3t` extensions built for the Python 3.15 limited API will be importable on Python 3.15, 3.16, 3.17, and all future Python 3.X versions.
```

The downside of this is that PyO3 can't use optimizations which rely on being compiled against a known exact Python version.
It's up to you to decide whether this matters for your extension module.
It's also possible to design your extension module such that you can distribute `abi3` or `abi3t` wheels but allow users compiling from source to benefit from additional optimizations - see the [support for multiple python versions](./building-and-distribution/multiple-python-versions.md) section of this guide, in particular the `#[cfg(Py_LIMITED_API)]` flag.

There are three steps involved in targeting `abi3` or `abi3t` when building Python packages as wheels:

1. Enable the `abi3` and/or `abi3t` feature in `pyo3`.
   This ensures `pyo3` only calls Python C-API functions which are part of the stable API, and on Windows also ensures that the project links against the correct shared object (no special behavior is required on other platforms):

   ```toml
   [dependencies]
   pyo3 = { {{#PYO3_CRATE_VERSION}}, features = ["abi3", "abi3t"] }
   ```

>    Enabling both the `"abi3"` and `"abi3t"` features will produce an abi3 extension if the host interpreter is a GIL-enabled interpreter and an abi3t extension with a host free-threaded interpreter.

Reviewer: I think based on previous discussion and other edits in this PR, this should read

```suggestion
   Enabling both the `"abi3"` and `"abi3t"` features will produce an `abi3` extension if targeting Python 3.14 or older and an `abi3t` extension if targeting 3.15 or newer.
```

   If you always want to produce `abi3t` wheels, you can enable just the `"abi3t"` feature, which will produce extensions targeting `abi3t` if the host interpreter is Python 3.15 or newer, but will produce version-specific extensions otherwise.
   If you only enable the `"abi3"` feature, you will produce `abi3` extensions if the host interpreter is a GIL-enabled build of CPython and version-specific extensions otherwise.

   We suggest enabling both features and using multiple python interpreters to build several wheels.
   You can build an `abi3` wheel for your minimum supported Python version, a `cp314t` version-specific wheel using a free-threaded Python 3.14 interpreter, and an `abi3t` wheel using a Python 3.15 interpreter.
   This will produce wheels targeting all versions of CPython that PyO3 supports.

2. Ensure that the built shared objects are correctly marked as `abi3` and `abi3t`.
   This is accomplished by telling your build system that you're using the limited API.

>    [`maturin`] >= 0.9.0 and [`setuptools-rust`] >= 0.11.4 support `abi3` wheels and [`maturin`] >= 1.14 supports `abi3t` wheels.

Author: Ping @messense, it probably makes sense to coordinate the release of PyO3 0.29 and a maturin release that supports abi3t.

Reviewer: What does `setuptools-rust` need to do to support `abi3t`? I guess we should add some testing.

Author: I haven't spent any time checking yet. I suspect it needs https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/pull/5193 which hasn't had any review from a setuptools maintainer. There will probably be more activity in setuptools closer to the 3.15 release (I heard there was a proposal at the packaging summit to break `pip install .`) but to be honest I'm mostly thinking of ways to give people offramps from setuptools.

>    See the [corresponding](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin/pull/353) [PRs](https://github.com/PyO3/setuptools-rust/pull/82) [for](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin/pull/3113) more.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should just drop this line?

See [the relevant section of this guide](./building-and-distribution/multiple-python-versions.md#checking-the-python-version-at-runtime) on supporting multiple Python versions at runtime.

PyO3 is only able to link your extension module to abi3 version up to and including your host Python version.
E.g., if you set `abi3-py39` and try to compile the crate with a host of Python 3.8, the build will fail.

> [!NOTE]
> If you set more that one of these `abi3` version feature flags the lowest version always wins.
> For example, with both `abi3-py38` and `abi3-py39` set, PyO3 would build a wheel which supports Python 3.8 and up.

#### Building stable ABI extension modules without a Python interpreter

As an advanced feature, you can build a PyO3 wheel without calling Python interpreter with the environment variable `PYO3_NO_PYTHON` set.
Also, if the build host Python interpreter is not found or is too old or otherwise unusable, PyO3 will still attempt to compile stable ABI extension modules after displaying a warning message.

#### Missing features

> Due to limitations in the Python API, there are a few `pyo3` features that do not work when compiling for either `abi3` or `abi3t`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to limitations in the Python API, there are a few `pyo3` features that do not work when compiling for the stable ABI.
```
